---
layout: post
title: 'Rich Client Platform 3.x'
type: post
categories: [Programming, Java]
author: yylonly
---

## Main components of an Eclipse RCP application

The minimal required plug-ins to create and run an minimal Eclipse RCP application (with UI) are the two plugins "org.eclipse.core.runtime" and "org.eclipse.ui".

Based on these components an Eclipse RCP application must define the following elements:

1. **Main program** - A RCP main application class implements the interface `IApplication`. This class can be viewed as the equivalent to the main method for standard Java application. Eclipse expects that the application class is defined via the extension point `org.eclipse.core.runtime.application`.

2. **A Perspective** - defines the layout of your application. Must be declared via the extension point `"org.eclipse.ui.perspective"`.

3. **Workbench Advisor** - *invisible* technical component which controls the appearance of the application (menus, toolbars, perspectives, etc)

## Application

This class is typically called Application and must implement the interface IApplication.

```
Display display = PlatformUI.createDisplay();
PlatformUI.createAndRunWorkbench(display, new ApplicationWorkbenchAdvisor());
```

## WorkbenchAdvisor

`PlatformUI.createAndRunWorkbench()` creates and runs a Workbench. The Workbench represents the graphical user interface of Eclipse. The visual part of the Workbench is represented via the `WorkbenchWindow` class. A Workbench can have several WorkbenchWindows opened. The inner part of the WorkbenchWindow is represented via the class `WorkbenchPage`.

The `Workbench` is configured via a class of type `WorkbenchAdvisor`. This class defines the `initial Perspective` and defines the `WorkbenchWindowAdvisor` class.

### WorkbenchWindowAdvisor

`WorkbenchWindowAdvisor` calls the class `ActionBarAdvisor` which configures `Actions` for the Workbench and defines initial attribute for the `WorkbenchWindow` as `initial size`, `title` and visibility of the statusline.

```
public ActionBarAdvisor createActionBarAdvisor(IActionBarConfigurer configurer) {
    return new ApplicationActionBarAdvisor(configurer);
}

public void preWindowOpen() {
    IWorkbenchWindowConfigurer configurer = getWindowConfigurer();
    configurer.setInitialSize(new Point(400, 300));
    configurer.setShowCoolBar(false);
    configurer.setShowStatusLine(false);
    configurer.setTitle("Todo"); //$NON-NLS-1$
}
```

### WorkbenchPage

The WorkbenchPage contains `Parts`, which can be `Views` or `Editors`.

`Views` are used to display information in an RCP application; they can also be used to change data. `Views` extend the abstract class `ViewPart`. `Editors` extend the abstract `EditorPart`. Both extend `WorkbenchPart`.

An `editor` typically requires that the user explicitly select "save" to apply the changes to the data while a view typically changes the data immediately.

All editors are opened in the same area. Via the perspective you can configure if the editor area is visible or not.

Views and Editors are defined via extension points in the file plugin.xml via the tab "Extensions".

`Views` are defined via the extension point `"org.eclipse.ui.views"` and `Editors` via the extension point `"org.eclipse.ui.editors"`.

`Views` must implement the `createPartControl()` and `setFocus()` methods:

* `createPartControl() `is used to create the UI components of the View. `createPartControl()` will get as parameter a Composite which can be used to construct the user interface. This composite has by default a FillLayout layout manager assigned to it. This layout manager assigns the same space to all components equally.

* `setFocus() `must set the focus to a specific UI component.

`Note that RCP 4.x` is not extends from `ViewPart` and `EditorPart`, `composite()` is annotated with `@PostConstruct`

## Perspective

A `Perspective` is defined via `"org.eclipse.ui.perspectives"`. The `WorkbenchParts` which are part of a Perspective are either defined via `a Java class` defined in the extension point the `"org.eclipse.ui.perspectiveExtensions"`.

layout.addView() adds a view to the perspective. or directly on `perspectiveExtensions`

```
public class Perspective implements IPerspectiveFactory {
    public void createInitialLayout(IPageLayout layout) {
        layout.addView("de.vogella.rcp.intro.first.MyView", IPageLayout.TOP,
                IPageLayout.RATIO_MAX, IPageLayout.ID_EDITOR_AREA);
    }
}
```

You can also add `placeholders` for views via the `layout.addPlaceholder()` method call. This methods accepts wildcards and a View with a matching ID would open in this area.

For example if you want to open all views in a specific place you could use the `layout.addPlaceholder("*", )` method call, or

`layout.addPlaceholder("view_id",…​.)` to open a View with the "view_id" ID in this placeholder.

You can also `group view` via a IFolderLayout which can be created via `layout.createFolder()` call and by adding Views to this folder via the `addView(id)` method on IFolderLayout.

Above all can be replace in RCP 4.x with application model `.e4xmi`
